most of us only do one thing with our
partners
and it's watching TV to me it comes back
down
there's a former monk whose wisdom has
truly gone viral on purpose the number
one Health and Wellness podcast sold
like a million and a half books Jay you
know how much I love you I think we live
in a world where we think sacrificing
our purpose makes us a better partner
when actually it makes us more resentful
guilty more upset so I believe that
there are four important decisions that
we all get to make in life if you can do
that everything else is going to work
the first one is
Let's Talk About Sex the truth is most
people are not getting any we've lost
Intimacy in relationships great sex is a
byproduct of great connection and
intimacy it's not a replacement for or a
sore song I promise you that
relationship is not growing it's
actually falling apart slowly and you
have no idea the only thing that makes
you feel close to someone is venue
what have you struggled with this year
big question a lot of the time when I
come up against any resistance it's like
no Jay you used to be a monk if you do
anything else your faults and you're
lying and you're not allowed to be
anything else every time I do an
interview I'd feel like people wanted me
to fail I was just waking up feeling
sick and I just had to be alone
I don't think I've shared this with
anyone
I'm at a point where
I just want to start this episode with a
message of thanks a thank you to
everybody that Tunes in to listen to
this podcast by doing so you've enabled
me to live out my dream but also for
many members of our team to live out
their dreams too it's one of the
greatest privileges I could never have
dreamed of or imagined in my life to get
to do this to get to learn from these
people to get to have these
conversations to get to interrogate them
from a very selfish perspective trying
to solve problems I have in my life so I
feel like I owe you a huge thank you for
being here and for listening to these
episodes and for making this platform
what it is can I ask you a favor I can't
tell you how much you can change the
course of this podcast the the course of
the guests were able to invite to the
show and to the course of everything
that we do here just by doing one simple
thing and that simple thing is hitting
that subscribe button helps this channel
more than I could ever explain the
guests on this platform are incredible
because so many of you have hit that
button and I know when we think about
what we want to do together over the
next year on this show a lot of it is
going to be fueled by the amount of you
that are subscribed in that tune into
this show every week so thank you let's
keep doing this and I can't wait to see
what this year brings for this show for
us as a community and for this platform
[Music]
what's up Stephen
it's good to see you
this is a this is a question that people
are so flippantly right because that's
just the way Society is and the way we
all are
but I mean this question in the most
deep possible way
um which is how are you
big question
I'd say that I'm at a point
and I'd only give this answer to you I
don't think I've shared this with anyone
publicly at least right now I'm at a
point where
I'm really
reflecting reviewing and reassessing
where I want to be what I want to do how
I want to give my energy and so I'm in
this really
evolutionary stage in my journey which I
probably haven't felt like this for six
years which is when this all kind of
started externally and so it's been a
really interesting six-year cycle and I
feel like I'm back to where I started I
definitely feel like this year
I
pushed myself to limits that I never
thought I could when it came to work
productivity efficiency
Effectiveness impact like the quality of
the impact this year was higher because
everything else was booming higher and
at the same time there's this
natural sense of
wanting to renew wanting to reinvest in
myself and grow again it's almost like I
feel like I did a lot of growing and I
poured it all out
and now I'm ready to grow again
and pour that out again but I've got to
go and refill that cup got to go and
ReDiscover what that is and what that
next thing is that excites me that
drives me that moves me to that
level that brought us here today so when
you ask me how I am really or how I am
deeply
I'm in that regeneration stage but
what's beautiful about it is that when
you've been there before it's a familiar
feeling whereas when you were there for
the first time it was scary now I'm like
I've been here before I know what this
feels like I know how to find the tools
and skills that I need so what are the
symptoms of that how do you know you're
there
I know I'm there because what have you
been feeling yeah I've been feeling like
I want to know
where I want to be in five years or
which direction I want to move in five
years and I've been looking at that
question and I've been trying to answer
and I was speaking at a
conference recently in Mexico and one of
the answers was
Jay what's your goal for what you want
to do in the next five years and I was
like my goal right now is to figure out
what I want to do and what I want to put
my mind to for the next five years and
so I'm feeling a sense of accomplishment
I'm feeling a sense of
arrival I'm feeling a sense of
satisfaction and then I'm feeling a
sense of hunger and I'm feeling a sense
of
a search for clarity
and almost like I can see the next few
steps but then there's a bit of fog and
Haze
and that excites me so there's a feeling
of excitement that comes with that
search for clarity of that if that helps
so in the short term you can kind of see
what how things look but then as you
look at the maybe the north star that
you're aiming at that's a little bit
less clear yes yes that's exactly it and
and but it's coming at it from a point
of that's what I need to do right now
not what I have to I think if I felt
clear about it all I don't think I would
actually achieve what I want to achieve
I think I'd waste time
waste effort I think we'd spend time
being
doing stuff that didn't really excite me
or move me I think that I think you get
to a point where you know you can do
something well
and you don't just want to keep
repeating that because that doesn't fuel
your soul or that doesn't make you into
the person who you want to become and so
while I know that I can do that
that's just not who I would set out to
be and that's not how we got here and so
I don't want to repeat a cycle that I
know I know how to repeat just because I
can when that isn't why I set out to do
this what is that cycle let's get really
specific on
what is that cycle that you've mastered
that you think you know that will no
longer give me that same ah you know I'm
probably different to a lot of people
who set out and say I believed I would
achieve this or I had a certain set of
goals and I did that I I didn't come
from that I came from this raw passion
to want to serve and hopefully uplift
the World by sharing ideas that people
would listen to that and go oh I have
that conversation with my friend but I
never thought it was okay to say it out
loud or
I was just thinking about that last
night but Jay just put that into words
and now I feel comfortable sharing that
with my partner and so I came at this
whole thing from the approach of how do
I help the individual and the micro
and then all of a sudden it took off and
and became this thing that was Far
bigger than I ever imagined and far
greater than I could have ever dreamed
of or Bill and so what I mean by the
specifics is you've now learned how to
create value for people in a certain way
whether that's with an algorithm whether
it's a pattern whether it's the ability
to communicate an idea and then you go
yeah I can either get lost in that cycle
and keep delivering because it delivers
but no that actually came from a raw
desire to serve that actually came from
a place of abundant creativity that
actually came from a place of
genuinely listening and genuinely
compassionately giving it didn't come
from a place of patterns algorithms
studying and research like that's not
why the impact happened if that makes
sense do you ever feel like you've lost
yourself in the algorithms
I don't people know you as a master of
social media of delivering ideas via
social media value thoughts thinking
um you became you know people see this
across their lives they become
exceptionally good at something whether
it's being a lawyer or whatever and they
end up climbing and climbing and then
they kind of reinforce to continue to do
that thing Publishers give them money
and say do that thing you did yeah and
then they can get so far down that path
that they go wait a minute
like how did I get here it's a great
place yeah effectively but I think I
want to give myself credit and I don't
do that often but I will for this I
think I'm going to give myself credit
and it was something you actually raised
to me last time we sat down which by the
way I got so much phenomenal feedback
from that conversation so thank you for
letting me go there
but you said something to me last time
and you said Jay
you're really good at knowing when to
quit and you said that I Was a Serial
quitter and I'd never thought about it
that way and so you actually planted
that seed in my head
and so I think what I've been good at
doing every time that that's happened is
I've chosen to break the cycle so when I
first started out I was the number one
page and number one Creator on Facebook
and we literally left Facebook and when
I say left Facebook what I mean is I
stopped creating the content that
Facebook was encouraging me to create so
we used to create these sketch-like
videos where we had actors and we would
cast them and there would be this
scenario and when I first came up with
that idea it actually came from me
watching comedians who were creating
sketch comedy and I was like oh wait a
minute if we applied that to inspiration
and motivation that would be phenomenal
so when I came up with that idea it
fueled me I was excited I remember we
made this video where this couple was
arguing and I gave them advice and it
was it went super viral and I was so
excited by it and then after doing that
for a couple of years and seeing this
incredible growth on Facebook that
format didn't fuel me anymore and so we
left it and I said I don't want to be
known for that format anymore why
because the format was owning me
right I was being owned by having to be
a specific Creator giving specific four
minute pieces of advice and thought and
I didn't want to be that I wanted to
dive into building a podcast and writing
a book because I wanted long form I
wanted quality I just felt like I felt
like there was only so much I could say
so there's two angles to this there's
two sides to this one is can I just yeah
yeah of course the reason I'm asking one
yeah I love this I'm thinking of Jenny
who is in a similar role in her job
who's listening to this and it's got
like she's just lost the love of the
thing which she once loved so I'm trying
to answer this for her yeah yeah I love
the question I I think that
so anytime you discover something
anytime something's new it's attractive
you fall in love with it and as it gets
old
we only keep doing it because there's
some part of it that becomes
performative so what was raw passion
becomes performance and I think
performance is what drains us because
performance Now isn't a natural
injection of the Soul into whatever
you're creating it's this
false acting version of that same thing
and so I find that when I feel like I'm
performing
I worry and get scared and then I scale
back and so I think at that point I got
to a point where I was like if I keep
feeding the algorithm and feeding this
it's performance and
the quality of what I want to give
people has changed the four minutes
videos were a great window into all of
the wisdom that I'd learned and all the
studying I did as a monk and all the
ideas that I'd gained but I was like if
I can't give that to people in a way
that they can practice it like a four
minute video can give you motivation and
inspiration but a four minute video
can't help you build a habit a four
minute video doesn't practically change
your life a four minute video is the
injection the spark the the buzz but it
doesn't transform someone's being
whereas a program can do that a book can
do that a podcast that people listen to
religiously and build a habit can rewire
parts of themselves and so to me I was
like I'm more interested in habit change
and transformation than I am in ideas
and information I was I was just
thinking about why I quit Facebook as
well you I mean you you quit Facebook I
think later but I understand why your
success on Facebook was you're getting
billions and billions of views a month
right
um I was making some money but it would
do the point the thing that I've
realized from what you just said there
is when I was making those Facebook
videos I actually think they they might
have been doing something for someone
else it's not the same as a podcast
which has the depth but I think it might
have been doing something for someone
else but I tell you why I quit because
it was doing nothing for me yes and you
think about what you were doing so at
the start maybe it was doing something
for you but then as you do it a thousand
times it feels like work and I was just
thinking about that then because I was
reflecting on a study I read that when
they pay people to do something they
loved
they lose the love of it the minute the
motivations become extrinsic cash or
punishment or reward they people lose
the love of the thing they once
considered a hobby
um and do you know why I was thinking
that because I've not been able to get
bored of doing the podcast and I thought
well why because it does something for
me I get to meet you we get you know so
if it was just this podcast was going
out to the masses and it required three
hours or six hours of my time every week
but I didn't get to have the
conversation I didn't get to be privy to
it maybe I'd lose the love for it yeah
and I think it comes back to a part of
the definition of success which for me
is doing something that gives me joy and
makes me happy that as a byproduct gives
other people joy and makes them happy
exactly like if I can do that every day
then then that's phenomenal but I don't
want to keep doing something as you said
that has the diminishing returns for me
only to live off the validation and
attention that comes from the other and
I think too many people have got caught
in that cycle for too many decades and I
would like to say we've redefined find
what we do every two years part of why I
dived into love as a Fascination and a
subject matter a lot of people said to
me they were like Jay why are you going
from meditation and mindfulness and
think like a monk to talk about love
like why why would you even do that and
I was like because that's where I'm at
like that's something that I'm I mean
there's lots more reasons to it that I
can share more philosophically but on a
very raw emotional level this is what
I'm fascinated about right now and I
trust that my audience my community the
people that are following and listening
and sharing and observing can trust that
the journey I'm going on is one of true
Fascination uh one of the reasons why I
fought to have the cover I wanted the
fonts that I wanted to not have my face
on the cover of the book was all of
these reasons I know if I put my face on
the cover of the book that my publisher
is going to be happier they believe it's
going to sell more they believe that the
less artistic it is the more on the nose
it is the more people are going to buy
the book my take is I want everything I
do to be r i want everything I do to be
an extension of my heart and this is
that and so I think I'm just at a place
now where I've learned that I can trust
my intuition every single time and I
want to keep doing that I don't want to
now become more scared of trusting my
intuition someone said to me they said
Jay like don't haven't you got to a
point now where you can't take any risks
and I was like no that's completely the
opposite of how I see it I've worked
this hard by taking tons of risks this
is not the point to stop taking risks
this is the point to continue to take
risk because that's what creates joy
happiness abundance success and
everything else I'm looking for what
have you struggled with this year
what have I struggled with this here
this year like over and over again like
[__] why can't I change that
so it's a bit of an oxymoron and and I
kind of lit I kind of love paradoxes and
kind of feel like it's always this way
it's kind of like
at one point you know that reinvention
and
rediscovery is constantly needed
and then there's the other side that
I've probably
bang my head against the wall a few
times on is accepting
that I can't always be Scrappy as I was
in the beginning all the time and I'm
and I'm intrigued at how you feel about
this especially having built something
so huge and now I know you're building
something again
I can't
that you know a few years ago when I was
starting out and we're building lots of
things we built things in a really
Scrappy quick fast way we made really
quick decisions some of them were great
some of them were terrible things went
wrong things went awesome obviously you
know
you know the rest of it is is history
and all all of that but there's a part
of me as much as I need to be
reconnecting with that scrappiness
there's a part of me that needs to
accept that we're not that small anymore
and that things do have impact and
influence and I think that that's that
Paradox is something that I find myself
constantly going back and forth on
because I want to be able to be Scrappy
I want to be able to start things at the
drop of a hat because I feel like I can
and at the same time I realize well no
now I need to think about a lot more
people and a lot more things are
affected and this can negatively impact
this and someone here could do this and
all of that kind of stuff and so I think
that's something that I struggle with is
the balance between saying I want to be
the J that I was six years ago when it
comes to starting new things but I have
to accept that we're not there as well
how many people are in your team total
globally full-time 50 people so it's not
huge
um but when you look at the people that
work with us and the number of people it
impacts and then the the scale of all
the content we create and everything
there's billions of people every month
still in in some capacity and so there's
a sense of and and also there's a sense
of you know you become a Target like
you're not you weren't a Target six
years ago like no one cared I mean
people took shots day one like that
wasn't the hard part it's just you
become more and more vulnerable in some
areas in some capacities because now
people are not looking at it as if
you're starting out they see what you
have and what they can pick apart so
you're you're a you're observant and
aware of that vulnerability in a way you
never were before that doesn't make me
more scared or more
uh fearful it just means I can't ignore
it and I think that's the balance that
I'm always going on it's like how much
do you want to operate from a place of
ignorance versus awareness and
proactivity
what's your biggest
um fear is an interesting word but I'm
going to use it what's your biggest fear
as it relates to being a Target like
what if you because I mean I've seen
this similar thing in my life obviously
the big change in my life was when I
became a dragon on Dragons yeah yeah
because then you're then you're like a
press Target before the newspapers
wouldn't write about Stephen in his
podcast or Steve on social media but now
it's Dragon stand star sneezes yeah on
someone you know what I mean it's like
because there's a show there which
everybody knows and recognizes there's a
way to write the headline yeah so that I
became much more of a Target you know
and that that's kept me up at night I've
got emails from reporters and I [__]
[__] myself about things that you know
they said they're gonna say about me or
whatever but just being honest yeah yeah
you know I think my life has just
changed so much in the sense of
literally I was thinking about this 10
years ago I left the monastery
and when I look at my life over the last
10 years and then if I look at it 13
years including the three years I spent
in the monastery I live like a
completely polar opposite life today I
went from having no money
no idea of a business no relationship
two sets of clothes
uh robes and living and sleeping on the
floor and having nothing and thinking
that was the rest of my life to now
being in the complete opposite point of
view where we have multiple businesses
I'm married uh I I enjoy fashion in my
wardrobe I uh I really enjoy building
teams I love the world I'm in and I've
grown and embraced all of that transform
transformation because I realized that I
could only give myself or I I had to be
the only person in the world who could
give myself the permission to be all of
these things all at the same time so I
see myself as much as a monk as I do as
a manager as I do as a marketer as I do
as a mindfulness coach like I'm all of
those things and I'm very happy being
all of those things but I think that a
lot of the time when I come come up
against any resistance it's like no Jay
you used to be a monk you should be a
monk for the rest of your life and you
can never be anything else and if you do
anything else outside of that Circle
you're false and you're lying and you
don't you're not the same person anymore
and I'm like well no I I get where
you're and by the way I actually don't
disagree with that I get where that's
coming from and I can appreciate where
that sentiment comes from because we've
all been forced to be like I'm an
accountant I'm a lawyer I'm a dad I'm a
mum we've been forced to be one thing
and I think for me I've been on the
Journey of accepting all of my
complexity and all of my interests and
passions and I think that that takes a
long time for a lot of people to get
their head around I'm not saying that my
community or my audience feels that way
and I don't want to alienate them I
think there's a lot of people who don't
even care about that but I think when I
when I think about the idea of being a
Target or being it's a lot of that where
it's like well you used to be this just
be this like you're not allowed to be
anything else oh a white and it's like
well no but my life's changed like that
was a part of my journey I'm telling you
a part of my story uh why can't I tell
you the story that I'm at why do I have
to be the story that I was 10 years ago
does that
and this uh you know there's several
ways to answer this question but I just
want the most honest answer which is
does that
has that ever bothered you have you ever
have you ever received received that
kind of critical feedback and it's
bothered you yeah there was definitely a
couple of weeks where I woke up
every day in the morning feeling sick
and I've never experienced
deep bouts of anxiety or I've definitely
experienced depression when I left the
monastery and that whole period was a
depressive moment in my life for sure
but post that
I was just waking up feeling sick and
for a week I just had to be alone
and I just had to be alone and not see
my friends and not see anyone my wife
was in London at the time so I wasn't
with her and I literally just sat alone
for seven days making sense of how I
felt about myself what happened
it wasn't anything specific it was just
feeling that there was a lot of
because I wrote a book called think like
a monk which I still stand by the title
I still stand by the whole book The
reason I wrote the book called think
like a monk is because I didn't want
everyone to have to live like a monk and
my whole point was that when you learn
to think like a monk you don't have to
live like a monk and that you can adopt
the same mindsets and practices that
monks have in your daily life which is
what I believe I took with me
but I found that when I would do an
interview you know the interview would
be oh Jay Shetty you know tells you to
think like a monk but he's selling
millions of books or whatever it is
right or like you know
um
oh yeah Jay Shetty made x amount of
money through ad revenue on Facebook and
YouTube but he's talking about being a
monk and so there was this constant like
comparison that those two things weren't
allowed and you were getting that
straight away every day correct and I
was just like why is it that I feel like
when someone's sitting down with me I
constantly feel like they want me to
fail they want me to not be
who I truly am and they want to find
that angle on me constantly because they
don't want to accept that someone who is
trying to be good at heart is doing good
in the work and winning is okay and
that's not a story though isn't that's
not a story exactly and I think that was
hard for me because I'd always believed
that
people would
feel your genuineness and and and they'd
respect that
um you know I think me and you have
Notch we've we've had deep time together
even though we haven't had a lot like
yeah yeah we wouldn't say we've had the
amount of time together but I felt very
early on that I could just be myself
around you hence why I've never talked
about any of what I've just said to you
anywhere else anywhere ever even on my
own podcast
um because I don't like meeting people
thinking they want me to fail and I and
I and if anything
I close off to that because it's defense
it's defense from day one and I realize
I don't defend myself very well because
I don't I don't want to I I just want to
be who I am and I'm comfortable with
that but that seven days was me doing
all that work to process it bring me
into this bring me in good man Stephen
only Stephen only with you man only with
you literally bring me into those seven
days
um and what it was like if I was a
flower on the wall in your world what
would I have seen the seven days
for me weren't mapped out in being seven
days like it wasn't like I'm gonna take
seven days and this is the program I'm
gonna go on it just happened to be seven
days and for me I'd say the first
day
I spent reading everything that
was making me feel that way so you're
reading all the comments you're reading
the tweets you're reading the Articles
you're seeing articles come in that
you've just interviewed for and you're
like wait a minute that's been
completely misconstrued like you're
feeling this way and and I'd say a lot
of this was you know UK based not really
International to be honest at all
um and and you're feeling that way and I
was just reading all of it I was
completely immersed in it for a day and
I gave myself a day I said I'm gonna let
myself do it today because I want to be
informed I want to be aware and you know
you just said this to me you were like
you know Jay I didn't see any of this I
don't even know about this and we've
talked about this before and that's
what's really fascinating right like for
me that day felt like the worst day
because it felt like
that's all there is that's all I'm
seeing even though there's everything
else going on
so I I'd say the first day I spent just
reading everything and you feel
terrible and horrific and there's a part
of you that feels defensive and you're
like but I'm not like that oh I wish
they could just understand this and oh
well they just read that differently and
I I wish I could talk to this person who
feels this way and like hold their hands
and look into their eyes and for them to
feel my real energy I wish they could
give me a chance I wish I could actually
talk to each one of these people maybe I
should maybe I should actually like book
a room and just line up everyone who
feels this way about me and actually sit
down with each of them and talk to them
about what my passion is and who I
really am as a human being maybe maybe
that's what I need to do and you're kind
of doing this whole defensive and
explaining and that all of that was day
one
uh maybe even day two
and I think day three and four were
really the hardest because you start to
believe
some of the criticism
so there's a part of you and I think
this is a good part of me I'm I'm happy
that this part of me exists where
I have the ability
to be really critical and harsh of
myself to the point that I kind of
embodied some of those ideas and I was
like maybe maybe I am
maybe I am
not fully genuine maybe maybe I do have
that part inside of me like God maybe I
am wrong like
you know maybe maybe I do need to take a
look at myself maybe I haven't maybe I'm
maybe I'm not doing that enough
and so I'd say that was day three and
four and that was the hardest because
you're now taking someone else's words
to be your worth and you're taking
someone's
writing to be
who you are and so I think day three and
four were just
kind of processing like do I really
agree with that am I that what part of
that is me I can't just sh I never I've
never wanted to be someone who doesn't
take something as feedback like or
doesn't look at something or try and
understand it more deeply and anxiety
how do you feel on these days you talked
about I feel like throwing up in the
morning really like waking up and
feeling like physically sick
uh and and wanting to throw up but
trying not to and how and that feeling
lost all day or was it just when you
woke up I think it was mainly when I
woke up like it was it was a strong
feeling when I woke up and I'd have to
work through that over the next couple
of hours and then get over that and then
try and progress the day and I think
day five
and six
were making sense of
what was feedback
what was
shots fired
and
what I believed about myself
run me through those three so
the way I
and and and even deeper than all three
of those and I'll talk about those three
but even deeper than those three three
of those was this idea of
compassion
of why
do people feel the need to do this
like what role does it play
in their life in our world
and why does someone feel the need
to without never having spent
genuine equality time with me
to feel any way about me
also not knowing anyone in my universe
either so you know and so so trying to
have compassion and developing a sense
of perspective
of
what role does this play in our society
that's the most difficult Point
um to understand which is
I remember someone tweeted something at
me the other day and they just like they
just you know because it's funny because
we get you know so much wonderful
feedback and then some guy at 3am he's
just like
he just took a shot and he was like I
wish Steve was more authentic his PR
team write all of his posts and script
his podcast and he's and the the
challenge of trying to make sense of
this this like statement where it's
coming from why they felt they need to
tweet it at 3am what I've done to them
is an impossible challenge to try and
solve it's a riddle that doesn't make
sense but the only way that I've come to
understand it is by looking at my own
imperfection yes looking at my own
jealousy yeah looking at my own envy and
my exactly inadequacies and how
sometimes I'm ugly and then I go I
understand we all have it in US probably
somewhere in the right context yeah
especially if you've got a bad day and
the wife or the husband has given us a
hug you know
and then I understand I'm ugly too yeah
you know um but going to those three
those three stages what feedback did you
I I think the feedback
that I've taken on is that
I definitely have changed externally
like in the sense of it is true that
uh my life is very different externally
very quickly that that's true to me it's
not quick because it's 10 years since I
left and 13 years since I was a monk and
everything but it is it is quick and it
is a lot
to
you know it's been a crazy Journey For
Me internally let alone everyone else
who's just just watching
um
and the feedback that
maybe I should explain and probably why
I feel so open today doing this with you
and comfortable going there is maybe I
do need to explain
my intentions more and not just do the
work and maybe I do need to spend more
time giving context do you think though
because there's so many people that do
the
content the helping people the you know
the genius stuff you do there's so many
people that do that and they don't get
the same criticism
it's the monk piece isn't it it's it
feels like it's contradiction it's the
monk piece and it's also the um
the scale
there's people I'm thinking like the
biggest in the world in in the in that
game you're the biggest in the world I
guess in what you in the specific thing
that you do I guess but is it the
apparent contradiction of two labels
that the society have given you where
they go successful
rich nice stuff
but then because it's the same with me
no one's ever going to do it for me
because they think of me as businessman
yeah yeah so if I was balling around in
private jets and helicopters people are
going to go yeah yeah and I'm not being
private yet by the way but yeah
no I think yeah I think that's I think
that is a big part of it and and I
recognize that that's a massive Paradox
and by the way I'm living that Paradox
which is even crazier because it there's
all that there's so much of that
self guilt and
transformation that I've had to go
through I've had to rewire my deeper
relationships with every aspect like and
I've realized that the monk teachings
actually hold true
they're just misunderstood or
misconstrued it's kind of like when we
you know when we keep having everyone
who keeps saying oh money doesn't buy
happiness money doesn't buy happiness
money you know so you've that that
statement's just lasted for so long and
you and I know that
that's not you know when it comes to the
Monk's philosophy the Monk's philosophy
was very much that everything in the
world was simply energy and it could be
used for something higher or could be
abused pretty much anything in the world
could could be put into that way of
thinking but the perception is monks
don't have money therefore it's bad but
that's a simplistic version of a far
deeper idea
uh there's a beautiful
story that I love that we would often be
shared in the monastery where
the teacher asks a student
if you could give one person a hundred
pounds or give a hundred people one
pound each which would you do
and the student says I'd give 100 pounds
to one person because it would be really
impactful
and the teacher says yeah that's that
there's nothing wrong with that answer
and that's totally fair another way of
looking at it is I'd give one pound each
to a hundred people because it helps me
learn how to become better at giving and
it gives 100 people an opportunity to
grow and so the idea is that the answer
isn't whether money is good or bad like
the answer some people say is well they
shouldn't give any money out at all like
I think the idea that something is bad
or evil or something is wrong is
a fall
more simplistic idea than the depth of
the idea that anything can be used for
good or For Worse I remember that you
know we've been able to do so many
beautiful things whether it's things
privately or even publicly when
you know my wife and I did this
fundraiser for
covid for India
um
and I remember like it took a lot of
money to just organize the fundraiser
and it wouldn't we wouldn't have been
able to do that if we didn't have what
we had and I was thinking to myself I
was like this is a perfect example of
like
how you you can't sometimes you need the
resource to pull off something that's
even more powerful and big but if I
didn't have the resource and I didn't
have the community and I didn't have my
audience and my fans and the people that
helped us do that it just wouldn't have
been possible and so it's kind of like
this all comes in and of itself it comes
together I remember when we met in New
York and you took me to meet the uh
rather than time yeah I could not say
that yeah that's my paused yeah yeah you
met you met my monk teacher yeah Swami
is the like the pope title like the
equivalent of that do you remember the
question I asked him I don't actually
tell me it was exactly what you've just
said so I said to him
um there's a part of me that has always
had this sort of internal conflict where
whether
if what I'm doing what I consider to be
selfishly like building businesses
enriching myself
is um is good or bad and I I've always
since I was 18 I remember being sat in
my room and thinking you know if instead
of building this business
if I just went to Africa and saved one
life would that be more of a worthy
cause than building a business that
would enrich myself and your your
teacher said to me he said um I'll never
forget it I talk about it all the time
on stage probably every month on stage
he said to me you can't pour out for
others that which you don't have in your
own bottle
I always remembered that because it's
entirely true the the impact that I
would be able to have now in many areas
whether it's the donations we've done
for children's cancer Societies or all
of the things that we've done this year
the money we've donated from we gave
away all of the money from our live tour
um none of those things even like this
podcast wouldn't have been possible if I
didn't fill my bottle and my bottle
isn't just Financial it's skills
resources knowledge it's Network it's
reputation
um and that full bottle allows you to do
so much for so many others but I do want
to zoom in on something you said yeah
you said that you had to confront your
ugliest side yeah now this is an
uncomfortable thing to do because it
really it's for all of us it's a quite
an uncomfortable place to go to actually
consider faults in ourselves
what is your ugly side
in your view oh hmm
I think whenever anyone does this
activity you have to be
it's it's again that balance of being
highly self-reflective and open to
feedback but not getting into the harsh
like
killing yourself basically because it's
and it's a really it's a really like
interesting balance I find because you
can easily do either like you can easily
defend yourself and be like no no I'm
good I'm a good person I'm great or you
can do the opposite but you're just like
I'm the worst that is yeah and it kind
of and that's why I'm you know as you
ask that question I'm like let me really
look at it um
my ugliest side is that
any and I believe this is true of most
people is that you're truly capable of
anything
anything and
I think my
practice and my daily habit
is
and has always been to try and feed the
good dog inside me
and so
I don't think I associate that deeply
with my ugly side because I've just not
fed it for a long time and so I don't
feel very close to it in the sense of
that doesn't mean it can't take effect
on me so so my teachers would always say
that if you feel like you're unaffected
by Maya Maya's the Sanskrit word for
illusion an illusion is considered
ignorance and that which leads to the
dark side or the ugly side if you feel
that you're unaffected by Maya you're in
Maya
right if you feel unaffected by illusion
or the dark side you're in the dark side
right yeah that makes sense and it's the
idea as well of like if someone says
they're humble or practicing humility
it's like they're in ego right now it's
yeah it's not possible to think to
yourself oh I'm I'm I'm humble at the
same time as feeling ego less
and so the idea that
I feel like I just don't associate with
my dark side often but I think my dark
side exists within this capacity of like
you know the the comparison the Envy the
jealousy the the ego that that's the
kind of stuff that I would say that
mainly I would grapple with and I grew
up with on a daily basis and I choose to
Grapple with it on a daily basis we in
the monastery often talked about
uh relishing the battle Yeah that that
there was always going to be a battle
the battle was never won or lost it was
a constant relishing the battle you just
had to re-pick up the sword and have the
fight every day and so I've learned to
relish the battle and the battle is
accepting that there is both inside of
me and it's a battle I have to have
every day and the avoidance or ignorance
that I don't have one of the sides
isn't healthy right and in my case it's
just not healthy I can't accept that I I
have only pure intentions do you believe
you'll get to a point where you've won
the battle
I don't think so I don't think that's
the goal I I I think I think the moment
you think you've won the battle is when
you lose I mean there's that brilliant
clip on uh social that's always going
viral and it's literally like I forget
what the line is but I think the caption
is something like it's never over until
it's over and it's all the Moments in
Sports where someone's felt that the
ball's gone across the line or hasn't or
the person's running thinking they're
about to cross the finish line they look
over and they lose every single time and
I think that that's a great image and
metaphor for the idea that as soon as
you think you've won that's when you're
most likely to lose because that's when
you put your guard down and I think
putting your guard down to your own Envy
into your own comparison to your own ego
is unhealthy and I think sometimes when
we see the crazy things that happen in
the world
it's not because someone was made that
way or built that way it's that they let
their guard down to those things and so
when I'm saying that I sat for seven
days with my demons and my dark side and
my unhealthiness and checked myself
I'm I'm glad I did that and I shouldn't
avoid that I shouldn't sit here and say
no no I know I'm an amazing human being
and I'm a good intention I know all this
thing I am good intentioned I am someone
who cares about people I I am deeply
compassionate I have only ever tried my
best to serve in love those are all true
I'm very confident in that but at the
same time I have a propensity
to be egotistic to be envious to be
jealous to be comparative to be
competitive and unhealthy sense and if
I'm more Vigilant of that that won't
ruin it and that's the Perfect Analogy
that was given to us in the monastery
was we all had to plant a seed and tend
to it every day because you'd see weeds
grow around it every day and this was
the exact concept that was taught to us
that when you plant a seed weeds are
going to grow around it and the weeds
often look like the plant they often
look perfect and you can keep watering
the weeds or water the seed and pluck
the weeds and that's the daily practice
that each and every one of us does so I
think every day I sit with myself in my
meditation and I try and pluck out the
weeds and sometimes it's not plucking
sometimes it's ripping gripping
destroying uprooting like the weeds have
gone deep some of these weeds are not no
longer little seedlings and little
plants some of them have been around for
years and so there's that work that has
to happen
are you thinking about a particular weed
um but you've really had to like work on
and unplug I mean I've got loads in my
life that I know that you see the it
continue to rear continues to show up in
the the moments where you're maybe
complacent yeah about you know you think
you've got it all figured out and then
[__] over here yeah I think the biggest
one
that I probably monitor I mean I monitor
all of them regularly but I think it's
the weed that we all have
that the way we live life is the right
way to live it like the belief that my
perspective my opinion my priorities my
values
should be everyone's and that somehow
because of that we should all align and
I think you see that as your partner the
most like for example my wife really
values her my value my wife really
values her mentor and physical health
and so her number one priority today in
the day is making sure she's meditated
and making sure she's gone to the gym
like those are like massive priorities
for her and sometimes there'll be two
workouts and more meditation and I'm
coming back off of a slog day of like
working podcasts meeting schedules all
this other stuff and I've meditated but
I haven't worked out today and I'm
running around and I think at the end of
the day that I've achieved more like
that is a weed because I'm saying that
what I prioritize is more important than
what she prioritizes when it isn't it's
just different she her self-worth is
based on very different things than my
self-worth is based on do you ever find
you know when you're saying all of this
you're describing exactly me and my
partner I love that man that's good she
wakes up at seven or eight in the
morning yeah she's built like a temple
and she goes to the temple people and if
I woke up past two hours later she's
just stretching in the temple yeah you
know what I mean I'm like zooming past
with like you know late for some [__]
and she I just she's just stretching in
a temple she flows that's the way she
just flows nice and slowly through life
um at her own pace a pace that I know
nothing about yeah a place I could not
relate to yeah same same so I was going
to ask you about this have you ever
found yourself
making the mistake of exerting your
your ambition
flows that you know that pace because I
have yeah yeah
I think I think
and I write about this in the book but
by the time I was
by the time I was with my wife and we
moved in and got married and like
started really
investing in our relationship I think
I'd seen a lot of people do it to other
people so my wife would always get
people around her she's a phenomenal
chef and cook and you know really really
talented when it comes to food and
health and nutrition so the one thing
she'd hear from everyone was you should
start a restaurant like that's all she'd
ever hear is you should start a
restaurant you should start a restaurant
and whenever I'd I'd see the like
sometimes fear confusion uncertainty on
her face when people would say that this
is like you know I'm talking about like
seven years ago maybe eight years ago
and
I would always sit with Edward there and
be like how do you feel when people say
that like what is does that excite you
does that you know if someone told me
that and I had her skills I'd be like oh
that's amazing people believe in me
right which is something I never really
had
and she was like no I just I don't know
if I want a restaurant like I don't know
if that's what I want to do with my
skills like I she always wanted to be in
Pediatrics and she wanted to help people
with their nutrition and diet and she
wanted to work with individuals and work
with and now she's working with people
online and she does making love making
recipes but does she want to build a
restaurant and so we'd always go through
that cycle and I started to realize and
we'd have this conversation often that
just because someone says something
that's a good idea it doesn't need to be
your idea and you don't need to chase it
and so I'd say that I don't think I've
ever
pushed my pace
on her because I think part of being a
coach and this is why I value coaching
so deeply
is because a coach is never meant to
dictate the pace of the person they work
with and so there's a chapter in the
book called your partner is your Guru
and that's a really tough statement to
handle but actually a guru likened to a
coach never dictates the pace of the
student so my monk teacher who you met
wouldn't that day in New York would
never ever say to me Jay you've been
meditating for 17 years now why are you
not a pure perfect meditator they would
never say that to me because they don't
think that that's the pace at which it
works they know that I'm on my journey
on my timeline now at the same time I
think opening up conversations like I
will have the conversation with my wife
and be like uh are you thinking about
setting goals or intentions for 2023 and
do you want to talk about it because I'm
going to be doing that myself yeah and
I've seen that she's done that like
where
my wife has opened up to some of my
ideas and my ways of working because I
open up it as a conversation not as a oh
by the way these are my goals for 2023
what are yours which where it's like a
pressure and that's like an insecure
amateur version of trying to be a coach
where it's like well look what I've
achieved what did you achieve this year
or by the way let's look at our 2022
goals and what we achieved like it
becomes an ego thing again so I think
for me I've really tried my best to
embody being a coach in my partnership
because I see it just being healthier
when we've allowed each other's good
qualities to rub off and by the way
she's done the same back to me so if
I've coached her in like finding her
drive and her passion and her purpose
and and coached her in the sense of not
like meticulously but but as a friend uh
she's done the same for me like when I
met my wife I was someone who's really
focused on mental Mastery but I hadn't
really figured out what I did for my
body I'd done a lot for my mind and my
heart but and my emotions but but not
for my body and when I met my wife like
she inculcated the belly for me working
out more regularly and eating more
healthily and when I met my wife I was
addicted to Sugar I I still love fried
food I I still love sodas and my wife
was just like this ain't happening but
again she didn't call it out it wasn't
like a oh you're so unhealthy you just
sit around and drink it wasn't like that
it was educating me and it was
enlightening me and it was helping me
change my habits and so yeah inspiring
me and and it's setting the example
right I think setting the example is far
more
a beautiful there's a quote I use of
Saint Francis in the book which says
um
you should always preach wherever you
are in everything you do
and if you need to use words
right the idea that your example your
your practice is what inspires people if
you're working really hard and you're a
wonderful human being that far more
makes someone want to work hard then you
working hard and being a miserable human
being quick one intelligent of our
podcast sponsors and I want to talk to
you for a second about that built for
business vpro platform in today's
Working World the office is pretty much
anywhere and Intel V Pro means you can
remotely manage repair and protect
devices across your entire organization
no matter how large or small giving me
and my team peace of mind to work
wherever we choose to for my it team
whether on premise or via Cloud behind
the corporate firewall or not Intel's
vpro comprehensive manageability has us
covered this is something that is so
important to me I you know I'm a huge
believer in employee flexibility and
Trust so having features like this are
super helpful so to find out more search
intel.co.ukvpro and let me know how you
get on it is that time of year again
when my life becomes incredibly client
on Hill I'm busier than ever I'm trying
to be nutritionally complete in all that
I do I'm trying to make sure I get all
of the vitamins and minerals that I need
in my diet and heal has been for the
last three and a half years the primary
reason as it relates to my diet that
I've been able to be nutritionally
complete while also being incredibly
productive they've also been a sponsor
of this podcast since we launched the
podcast and so I owe them a huge debt of
gratitude for enabling this show and in
fact when we hit the million Milestone
on YouTube with this podcast I sent it
to the founder because I've never shared
this before but he actually said to me
when I started the podcast he was like
you're gonna absolutely kill it you'll
have millions of subscribers you'll be
this big you'll be that big so many
people will listen and I don't know if I
believed it if I'm being completely
honest but he believed in Us in this
show before we'd released one episode
which is a remarkable thing and he gave
me a huge amount of self-belief in
myself so thank you Julian Hearn for
that but also thank you hewell for
creating a product that has helped me
and helped my health stay intact in my
busiest days over the last couple of
years
to the episode I've always wondered this
I'm going to ask you a really tough
question here if your partner got to a
state where you no longer found them
attractive at all you know
I'm gonna let the viewer decide what
that might look like right if your
partner got to that state
what would you do
I think because they weren't taking care
of themselves yeah yeah I I think my
honest answer would be I would like to
approach that and I believe I would
because I think I've shown it in
different areas of my relationship not
in the physical sense
have been The Compassion of
are you happy with where you are right
now with that person are you happy in
the direction that you're moving in is
this the life you want is has this been
created out of
pain or stress or pressure or has this
been created out of choice and out of
action right and I think getting to
understand that person's journey to that
point sets you up to understand where
this is going if that person then turns
around and goes this is exactly who I
want to be and this is the person I want
to be and this is how I choose to live
my life I'm your partner yeah what do
you say to me
yeah so I'm going down the angle of
trying to get to understand right like
that that's what I'm trying to do in
this area they are completely cool with
everything correct because it's you're
you're the one that's Coast attraction
yeah all I'm trying to do in that
scenario genuinely is to understand
where the person's at why they're in
that position and how long they think
that's going to last and so my next
question would be like that sounds
awesome that sounds like a lot of fun
how long do you feel like that's where
you want to be now your answer maybe I
feel like that's how I want to live
forever right like that's that's the
direction it's going in
I have very little control over that so
what do you do
I would then if if I'd explored that
conversation try to understand first yes
and seeing that pattern for long enough
because by the way that pattern could
last a week and it could be over next
week yeah and that person's now guilty
and shameful of and they're dealing with
something far deeper so I don't think
this can ever be
oh wow that person for a month has gone
in this direct it's never that quick
right yeah if you're seeing over months
and years that someone's just going on a
downward spiral they're not opening up
to you they're not opening up to a
therapist they're not opening up to
their mum their parents their sister
they're not opening up to a coach
they're not opening up to their friends
like if you're seeing no sign of this
person doesn't feel they're going in
they're doing anything wrong by their
account
now you're out of options of of
controlling that so I think there's many
more layers before I don't think this
person's right for me anymore but I
think those layers and levels are time
how long has this lasted I think it's
who are they honest and open with
because sometimes they may not be honest
and open with you because they're
embarrassed but they're being open and
honest with someone else their family
their friends whoever else it may be do
you are you aware of that are you do you
even know the conversations they're
having
and then if you're not attracted to
someone
I mean you're well within your rights to
to move on and and get on with your life
I mean how are you gonna force yourself
to if that's an important value for you
someone would say but physical
attraction isn't my number one value
that's totally fine too so you would
stay with that person right like if
that's not your number one value is
there a point where you express how you
feel absolutely absolutely I think I
think after understand I think the
biggest mistake that happens so I talk
about this in the book where I talk
about things that you find intolerable
about your partner right this comes
under that category that you find it
intolerable that they don't take care of
themselves and now you're not attracted
to them I talk about going on this
journey if you love someone enough if
you care about someone enough you will
want to go on the journey from
intolerable
to understanding
to acceptance
to potentially even admiring them for
who they are and where they've gone
that's the journey if you want this
relationship to last so if I find
something intolerable The Next Step
isn't telling them how I feel the next
step is understanding why they're there
how they got there what their reasoning
is and that takes time that person isn't
going to on day one they're going to
give you answers like you just gave me
on day 73 chances are someone's going to
say I'm feeling really bad about how I
am right or maybe not when you tell them
huh I'm interested in is how you
communicate how you're feeling I so I
would say and I want to use a real life
scenario with my wife because I think
it's easier to talk about a real
conversation we've had if I felt
emotionally disconnected from my wife
because we've both been traveling
separately we've both had a lot of work
on we haven't really found time to
connect or be with them be without the
Deep be with each other deeply I often
say to her and I've said this throughout
our whole relationship I'll say to her
is this relationship going in the
direction you wanted to go in
and that's a really open and Broad
question
she could say yes she could say no
and then my second question is if it is
going in the direction you wanted to go
in what's going well
and then I'd say if it isn't going in
the direction you're going in what do
you need and what are you willing to do
and then I'd follow that up with do you
mind if I share mine
do you mind if I if I share with you if
I feel this relationship's going in the
right direction or how I feel and so
once I've heard her out and seen where
she's at
I'm now going to tell her exactly how I
feel my way of saying would be I've got
to a place where I'm feeling emotionally
disconnected
I'm feeling like I don't feel like
you're present with me I don't feel like
you're connected I don't feel like you
want to
is that true
and I'm checking if my emotional
instinct is real now in this case it's
me saying I honestly feel that over the
last three years I haven't been able to
understand
I haven't really been able to gain
context of why you've made the choices
you've made
and I really want to understand and
deeply and there for you to understand
if these choices are aligned with your
values if they are those are not the
values that attract me those are not the
values that make me feel good about
being in a relationship because what I'm
saying is if you found someone
physically attractive and now you find
them physically unattractive I promise
you it's also based on their values and
choices it's not simply based on how
they look yeah that's too simplistic for
a modern day extreme powerful
relationship so to me I'm communicating
my disconnect with that person's choices
and values I'm not simplifying it to
just how they look in the mirror that
because that's me isn't the truth
because the truth is that because they
can change how they look in the mirror
but they don't want to is my issue with
it they don't want to they don't want to
build they don't want to be better in
all the ways I think they can be better
right that they don't see I don't feel
like they want to improve I was I was
coaching someone who's uh partner was
addicted to porn right and they're
addicted to porn their partner found
pictures and videos and all that kind of
stuff on their laptop and phone and all
the rest of it and we were working with
them and it was if that person didn't
see a problem with their addiction
that's where you were at
but the the person's problem wasn't that
they were just addictive porn it was the
lack of transparency it was the lack of
honesty it was the lack of emotional
connection the issue wasn't that they
were watching porn their issue was
don't you trust me enough to tell me
that there's a disconnect here that we
don't have enough of a relationship
where you can share this with me that
was the issue that they were having so
to me I'm always trying to communicate
empathy is communicating at the root of
the issue not with the symptom of what
you're experiencing and if someone
empathetically said to you Stephen I
I feel and this is my projection on you
and you're allowed to edit this
I just feel that you're worth so much
more and I feel like you can make so
many better choices for yourself and I
think you have the ability to get there
but I don't know if you want that and if
you don't want that that's totally fine
but that's the kind of partner I want to
be with would you never mention in that
process that you're not not attracted to
them anymore
I wouldn't never not mention their
direct thing I just think that I'm more
interested in Excavating you're going
around it's not going around it's going
under it's going deeper and deeper than
it's going deeper it's not going around
going around is saying like oh you know
I'm just it's not working out anymore
like oh you know I'm just seeing other
people now like going around it is like
you know going around it is just saying
yeah I mean even one sense of going
around it is just like yeah I'm finding
other people attract whatever like
you're going to the roots as opposed to
the leaves correct because I think that
not only helps the other person but it
helps me understand how to actually be
there for the person I love because I
think that if you go to the root that
person has the opportunity to say
thank you that's how I feel but I just
don't know how to say it so I want to
give the person the opportunity to feel
so heard when they can't even hear their
own voice but they can hear it through
my reflection on them where they can say
you know what you're right that is
exactly how I feel I know I can be so
much better but and if I can't find that
in them then we're not meant to be but I
want to be that voice for someone
because they can't find that voice
within themselves it's so interesting
because I imagine almost everybody
listening to this has those gripes with
their partner 100 whether you've been
together for five minutes or five years
where you you go I just she would be
more like me or I just wish she would do
it like me I wish you would love what I
love and I've been there with my partner
as well where
um I I suspect she wants me to be a bit
more interested in the things she's
interested in yeah and maybe vice versa
um but then also we have a different
style of communication and all of these
things and going back a couple of years
we had a problem with sex which we had
to confront where one day she turned
around to me and
and said that she was wasn't interested
in sex we've talked about this publicly
before yeah
um and the journey I went on to
understand all of that
the question I'm trying to ask is like
Dave or Rebecca who's listening to this
right now who wants to wants to change
something about [__] Rebecca wants to
change something about Dave
he's all he's always he doesn't care
about me he doesn't give me the quality
time all of those things
what's the path that Rebecca should take
to deliver that to Dave yeah at what
point should she go [__] Dave
you know what I mean because because
it's a success is a team sport in this
record right first thing I'm going to
say is
stop trying to change anyone because
people don't change
for people they change for themselves
like stop trying to change anyone people
do not change for you they don't change
for me they change for themselves and if
they don't want to change they're not
changing and if you want to change your
partner chances are they're not the
right person for you and by the way
anyone you date you'll always want to
change because somehow deep inside of
you you believe that the values you were
brought up with and what you think is
right is what everyone in the world
should do and so the core issue again
going to the route is us and our
projection like is my wife any less of
an amazing human being because she lives
differently to me no and I think that
relationships are so much more about
learning to respect other people's
values than they are to make them value
what we value I think the biggest issue
we're having in relationships right now
is we're saying well I like this why
don't you like it
relationships are saying I love that you
love that and I love this you go do your
thing I'll go do mine why do I want to
force my partner to come watch a
football game with me if they hate
football I'd rather go watch it with
someone that loves football and why is
she gonna force me to go do something
that I don't want to do I don't think
that that's compromise or connection I
think that's
ruining relationships quite frankly so I
think going to the core of the answer
now I'll coach through Dave and Rebecca
but I think going to the root of it it's
just the issue of stop trying to change
people if you're trying to change them
then you don't love them you love their
potential you love a version of them
that you think they can become that's
not them and stop trying to make them
that version because if you're in love
with who someone could be
then you're not in love with them and
accept that and I don't think we want to
accept that we want to think that we're
better greater human beings because we
see something better for someone and
there are projects and they're a project
and I talk about that in the book the
idea that you know
the project or there are three roles we
play in relationships one is the fixer
we want to find someone to fix and the
other is we play the role of the project
so we want to be fixed by someone else
so we're looking for that person and
really the right thing we want to be is
the supporter the partner the true equal
the true person who adds value to the
other person sometimes takes on the role
of the fixer sometimes is the project
but overall is coming at it from a point
of working on this together as you said
a team sport and so when it comes to
Rebecca and Dave ultimately the deepest
most beautiful question your partner can
ask you is where do you want to be
and do you want my help getting there
and if the answer to that question is
something you don't like then it comes
to the end of it because you're not
going to change them by manipulating
them by controlling them by forcing them
by coming up with a magic trick it's
just not going to happen like I think so
many people say to me Jay just you know
my my partner just won't read your book
I really want them to read your book and
I'm like please don't do that to them
you're about to push that person over
the edge and guess what not only are
they not going to read my book They're
not going to be interested in personal
development or growth because now you've
given it a bad taste half the atheists
in the world exists because religion
failed them it wasn't that they became
an atheist out of choice because they
were like oh I'm just going to be an
atheist it's because they saw someone as
part of a religion that failed them and
so when it whether it's personal growth
whether it's Health whether it's
mindfulness whether it's yoga whatever
your latest trend is that you're into
forcing your partner to get into it is
going to push them away far more then
it's going to excite them and entice
them and there's a message underlying
there which I which I felt in my life
where someone's pushing you to do
something or to check something out and
they're doing it very aggressively yeah
I'm I'm trying to read between the lines
yes I'm saying you know Steve please
read this book I go oh this is where
I'll read that as
here is she's presenting me with a flaw
that I have totally because the book is
about I don't know how to be great in
bed yeah and she's like babe please read
this book I'm thinking well what you're
actually saying to me is I'm not good in
bed yeah yeah totally totally so there's
always that's the problem when you're
dealing with love again isn't it totally
and you're not love means to understand
why someone makes the choices they make
and most of us don't even know why they
make those choices and we want them to
make our choices that's as simple as it
is you said something so amazing which I
thought was um that question that
Rebecca should be asking Dave which I've
never really thought about before which
is the first question you should ask
them is like
where do they want their life to go and
where do they see this relationship
going and then instead of trying to
interfere with that and design it
yourself and muddle with it just see if
it matches up to your vision of the
relationship
I imagine most people listening to this
now haven't done that exercise with
their partner where they they haven't
asked their partner by the way like what
is your vision for this relationship in
US yeah and even your own life yeah
it'd be interesting you know yeah I
think also just trying to I think the
reason why we haven't had that
conversation is most of us don't even
know our vision so the reason why we
haven't done that with a partner is
because we don't know the answer to our
own question and so before you ask that
question you should have your own idea I
know what I want my vision of a
relationship is we wake up excited to
see each other every day we go to bed
uh feeling accomplished and fulfilled
throughout the day we make time to
connect on understanding where each
other's lives are going where they
intertwine and where they separate and
we support each other in the goals I
break it down into three things in the
book I talk about
uh liking each other's personality and
the way I Define that's the first one of
the three what I mean by that is there's
an amazing study that was done that said
that in order for someone to be
considered a casual friend you have to
spend 40 hours with them
in order for someone to be considered a
friend you have to spend 100 hours with
them and for someone to be considered a
good friend
a great friend you have to spend 200
hours with them what are we so we're
we're nothing right now Stephen we we're
we're not doing very well on that list
now having said that we've also had very
deep time to like we're always opening
our entire souls and hearts to each
other so it's it's a different type of
relationship but the point is liking
someone's personality is do I want to
spend 200 hours with them that's how I
like to break it down is do I see myself
spending 200 hours with this person
trying to understand them the second is
do I respect their values you will only
know their values if you ask them if
you're aware if you can see how they
spend their time and money most people
don't like the way their partner spends
their time and money which means you
don't like their values but you're still
with them because you like something
else about them but the values are the
core of who that person is as a human
being
and then the third is do you want to
help them achieve their goals that's
love love means that you want to help
them get to where they want to get to
but most of us don't even know where our
partners want to go or where we want to
go so we're struggling with like three
fundamental things that define love and
we'll never know because we're trying to
patch it up with all the other stickers
that come up uh in making us feel good
yeah you said Point number one there
which was waking up to them every day
now when you when you said that I
thought [__] every day like well not
every day but I'm saying whenever you're
in the same yeah but that's what my
brain did well every day like yeah and
then that brought my mind to this point
about the role of distance yes in your
relationship yes
I've tested this love big time both ways
okay tell me what you've done so my wife
and I have been together for 10 years so
it's not long and it's not short it's
like you know it's a good amount of time
uh and
we've spent
up to six months apart a year sometimes
and we've spent as little as
two months apart a year so we've varied
in those 10 years anywhere from two
months to six months a year I've not
seen each other based on work schedules
priorities
Etc
and I was always someone who believed
that distance was really good for
relationships I think it's healthy to
miss each other I think it's healthier
if you have a plan of how you're going
to be apart
and I think it's even healthier if you
have a plan of how to reconnect after
the time apart and I think that's where
relationships and distance go wrong most
relationships in distance are either by
default or with no consciousness so we
just ended up not seeing each other for
x amount of time whether that's one week
one month or whatever it may be that
unconscious time of not being with each
other is not healthy for a relationship
you don't know why you're disconnected
you don't know for how long you don't
know how you're reconnecting and you
don't know how you're staying in touch
that's not good quality time away so
that's how to make time work for you
six months is too long six months
doesn't work I've tried and tested it
it's really bad uh it took six months
after six months
to reconnect
and I'm not
I literally felt like it was like a rule
that for every day I was apart
I had to spend a day of quality time
with that person
to refine and ReDiscover and to sustain
and to evolve and grow a relationship
and I literally felt that six months
apart took me six months with my wife to
get back to where we were before those
six months especially because some of
those six months happened unconsciously
and so unconscious time apart isn't
healthy and unconscious reconnection
isn't healthy and that was six months of
conscious reconnection after six months
of unconscious disconnectedness that
helped us connect again and I'd never
want to do that again it was it was too
painful to look at someone and someone
you love and someone you feel you've
really achieved something with to kind
of feel like
you had to rebuild it all again
it was it was too much and and I don't
want to do that again and so I'm
changing the way I feel about distance
I'm always going to make it conscious
it's always communicated and some of the
habits I've set up that have been really
helpful is I also set up not even just
disconnection physically but
time poverty and emotional so I'm going
on tour this year
and
when I go on tour this year I'm going to
be on the road in the US for three weeks
in total which is quite normal for me
and my wife to be apart for three weeks
so but it's communicated it's in the
calendar and then I come back to LA for
a month and I've kept that whole
schedule free because I want to plan a
few trips with my wife we may even go on
a vacation whatever it may be and then
after that I go on my world tour which
is another four weeks or five weeks of
cities all across
Europe India Asia and Australia and my
wife will pop into a couple of cities
but she's not going to come on the whole
tour with me and so again I'm like okay
which cities are you going to be in
which weekends am I going to take off
which nights am I going to be with you
and then what are we going to do when I
reconnect after the world tour it's now
coming from a completely conscious
organized space just as I would organize
work just as I would deal with a
business partner you just can't take a
relationship for granted it just will
break it will Wilt Away Paul Brunson
taught me something um he he was on the
podcast and he he said that him and his
wife had to make a rule he's from
America he's had to fly all over the
world to do these TV shows Etc he said
we have a rule where
if we're if an opportunity invites us to
be a part for more than two weeks we
either go together or I don't go
I know he's obviously got you know kids
and things like that and I really
thought that was really amazing yeah
difficult that's difficult it's very
difficult yeah I don't disagree with it
I just think that so he posted on his
Instagram the amazing I've just been
given an opportunity of a lifetime but
for practical reasons me and my partner
can't go together yes I've turned it
down and I think everyone needs to come
up with their own version of that rule
yeah because that's such a it's a great
Rule and if him and his partner have
committed to that and that's my hope
with the book with the rules it's like
come up with your own relationship rules
like one of ours is every 30 days we
spend
three days together without our phones
and we drive somewhere three hours away
from our home in La and spend that time
together and that's been a healthy habit
for us every month because I don't think
I want to wait for our annual vacation
to spend quality time together and so
whether you're spending one hour
together every week undisturbed without
your phones I also think that one of the
things I talk about is
the levels of connection so
I had a friend who just got back
from vacation
with her partner and
straight after that she was like but I
didn't feel like we spent any time
together and when she told him that he
said well we just spent three days
together what do you mean
and when I asked her well if you spent
three days together what do you mean she
said well he was on his iPad or he was
on his phone or he was on his laptop we
weren't actually together and I said
well you're not asking for time you're
asking for presents and you're asking
for energy so often our vocabulary is
wrong you know we're saying I want you
to come home from work on time that's
not what you're saying what you're
saying is I want to spend time where we
share energy and interact together but
we're using the wrong language and so a
we're not communicating what we want but
more interestingly I found that and
everyone can do this and I and I really
want people to take this in and really
let it sit
most of us only do one thing with our
partners
and it's watching TV
and that is the lowest form of intimacy
that you could possibly ask for with any
human being if you and I watch TV
together for 200 hours a year we would
potentially be no closer than we were
before yet with our partners all we do
is stay glued to a box for hours every
day waste minutes searching for what to
watch and then maybe having a quick
little chat about it and switching it
off so I have this pyramid of intimacy
and entertainment's on the lowest rung
of the ladder but that's what the
majority of couples are doing so if
we're only watching TV together
I promise you that relationship is not
growing it's actually falling apart
slowly and you have no idea and I know
that's a painful truth to accept but it
is it is An Inconvenient Truth
so higher than that and that's why it's
a ladder there's there's other steps
instead of entertainment I'm really
interested in people doing experiences
together something new something fresh
and experiment together what I mean by
that is how can you both do something
that you both are not experts at often
what we do in relationships is we say oh
well I love football come watch football
with me or I love this come watch this
with me I love this band comment
experience this band with me what we're
doing is we're creating an expert and
student mentality I'm going to teach you
what the offside rule is I'm going to
teach you about uh this this this music
and this whatever else it may be right
we're we're kind of creating that idea
that I know something you don't and what
that does in a relationship is it
doesn't create a shared experience a
shared experience is when we both go
somewhere where we both don't have a lot
of experience and now we get to discover
new things about our partner now we get
to see them in a new scenario now we get
to make ourselves both feel vulnerable
TV is not vulnerable so when we're
talking about creating vulnerability
it's not just in conversation it's in us
both doing an escape room that we've
never done before now we're vulnerable
without even trying right we're both
going to go and be part of an experiment
experience that we've never done before
because it helps us be vulnerable maybe
we're going to try a new sport that we
never play together me and my wife tried
surfing last year never done it before
this year we tried wakeboarding never
done it before we both look like fools
both can't do it to save our lives
actually she's much better than me so
I'll give her the credit but the point
is that the more you put yourself in
uncomfortable new experiences and
experiments and by the way I've given a
range of examples it could literally be
you know going to an art class together
or going to Pottery together or whatever
it may be it can be the most basic thing
do something where neither of you know
anything about it your vulnerability
skyrockets without having to have a
heart-to-heart conversation higher than
that level is education go and learn
together maybe there is a book that you
can both read together maybe there is a
podcast you can listen together maybe
there is a retreat that you both want to
go on maybe there is a course that you
both really want to do or alternatively
you both commit to doing separate things
but you report back and talk about it
one of you is learning an art one of you
is learning self-development now you're
sharing your exclusive learning Journeys
with each other you're both growing
together and then the highest thing is
serving together
go to a soup kitchen go to a homeless
shelter go somewhere that inspires you
both that affects you both and go and
help go and serve go and improve the
world together when you think about any
of those three out of the four yes they
take a bit more planning yes they take a
bit more time than watching TV actually
maybe you know I had argue that takes
the same amount of time
the quality of your relationship will
Skyrocket
immensely by doing any of those three
out of the four then just switching on
the Telly and I think too many of us are
you know
losing our partners losing ourselves and
losing our relationships because we're
expecting a TV show made by people who
don't really care about your
relationship
uh to entertain us
it brings me to chapter five of your
book where you say purpose comes first
yeah and there's a quote I wrote down
which is for any of us to bring the best
version of ourselves to our relationship
we have to pursue our own purpose in
Hinduism it's called our Dharma yeah
what is our Dharma what are the four you
know you talk about these four
fundamental Pursuits that drive us
forward in life yeah so The Vedas talk
about these four Pursuits in life who's
Vedas The Vedas v-e-d-a-s are the
uh kind of umbrella scriptures the
umbrella spiritual texts that have all
of this life advice and wisdom that I
share from from that context so The
Vedas are the particular texts and they
have these four Pursuits of life and
they are Dharma artha Karma and Moksha
and I'll describe each word because
those old Sanskrit words so Dharma is
purpose uh we'll dive into that one more
deeply Arthur uh and and all of my work
is pretty much
dedicated to this and I'll break it down
to my own language to make it to make it
simpler for everyone
I believe that there are four important
decisions that we all get to make in
life
the first one is
how I feel about myself
the second one is
what do I do to make money
we all need money what do we do for it
the third is who do I decide to love and
receive love from
and the fourth is how do I choose to
serve the world how do I choose to
impact the world
and so these are the four main Pursuits
that The Vedas espouse Dharma is your
purpose and who you are Arthur is
economic development karma is
relationships and connection and
milkshake's Liberation or service or
like ultimate giving
uh and so those are the four Pursuits
and it's really interesting to me that
Dharma is placed as the first Pursuit
not love and it's really interesting
because you look at people they did a
study on uh people graduated from
graduating from college and they asked
them that if you were to get married in
the next five years or stay single what
would be your happiness prediction
the majority of people predicted that if
they got married their happiness would
be at eight
but if they remain single their
happiness would be at a three
that perception is mind-blowing to me
they believe that if they're in a
relationship their happiness would go to
an eight
if they were single would be a three the
reality is if they stayed single and
they did the happiness stayed at a seven
and so their perception of loneliness
their perception of being alone was far
greater and so a lot of us skip purpose
because we find connection is an easier
solve to our internal unhealing so we
feel that if I'm with someone I'm gonna
feel better about myself than if I have
to do that work myself and is this in
order yes
okay so karma is essentially pleasuring
connection correct this is your
relationship with others people
prioritize that as being number one
number one exactly and that's what I'm
saying is the mistake that you're hoping
that someone is going to come and heal
your wounds without doing it yourself
which is why we're living in a world
where you know the right person could
come into your life and reduce drama and
the wrong person comes into your life
and increases trauma and that's the
experience that we're having that we're
coming from these unhealed places where
we don't know our purpose we don't know
our values we don't know our goals we
mesh with someone else who doesn't know
their purpose doesn't know their values
and doesn't know their goals and it
leads to confusion it leads to broken
hearts it leads to abuse it leads to
manipulation and control and so I do
this very simply and I ask couples that
I work with and I've worked with I've
been coaching a lot of couples over the
last few years especially while writing
this book and I ask couples that I'm
working with to rate their top three
priorities in order
including themselves
and I remember doing this with a lot of
couples and one particular couple
and
the man said
you
the kids me
and the woman said me
the kids you
and when we had this discussion he was
heartbroken
he said how could you put yourself above
the kids
he goes I'm not mad that I'm number
three I'll take that all day
but how did you put yourself above the
kids how could you even do that sounds
like he's mad at being number three
he's just using the kids in this game
what about me yeah and it was really
interesting because she she gave the
answer that I think me and you would you
know validate and agree with that she
was like but if I don't fill my own
bottle if I don't film my own cup if I'm
not my best self what am I giving to you
guys I'm giving you leftovers and she's
saying that it's not that the kids are
second on my list because I don't care
about them and if they needed me they're
going to be second it's more that I know
that I have to invest in myself and so I
think we live in a world where we think
sacrificing our purpose makes us a
better partner
we think the self-sacrifice and the
self-sabotage of our own goals and our
own Pursuits makes us a better person
when actually it doesn't it makes us
more resentful more guilty more upset
and I'm saying that because I've seen
people who gave up their dreams
for decades only in their 50s and 60s to
look back and go when the kids left to
go I wish I never gave up on my dreams
so I'm not saying this as Theory I'm
saying this is sitting down with people
working with people and seeing people
throw away their own purpose in the
pursuit of
I think that sacrificing it makes me a
better human being
it really reminded me then of my best
performing quote ever okay
I want to hear it this is the best
performing quote I've ever had
so much so that actually when I Googled
it it's attributed to someone else which
is really
oh it's crazy
I just Googled it right and this person
is too exact same thing which I actually
wrote about my ex-girlfriend and it's
got 150 000 likes on Twitter and 75 000
retweets it did better than what I
posted that that's crazy isn't it that's
amazing but um the quote is I'm actually
just going to read those yeah because
um I'll read mine yeah it's the exact
same thing word for word is if we're
dating I want to be your second priority
I want your first priority to be you
your Ambitions your life and your future
because my priority right now is me and
mine and finding happiness and security
alone is crucial to us finding it
together
and I wrote that actually in response to
my my ex-girlfriend who made me really
realize that that
um
we're gonna have no relationship we're
gonna have no security We're not gonna
have any happiness if we haven't first
found that to some extent together and
I've always almost criticized that
perspective of my of mine I thought
Steve is that because you're selfish and
you're into you know and you're
ambitious you just want to be or is
there truth in that and I
and there's this in
during question I have which is what
role is your partner meant to play and
we've kind of talked about a little bit
but in fixing you do you have to be
completely happy before you meet them
or do you do you have can you rely on
them to make you happy yeah and by the
way it's only not unselfish so yes what
you just said in self-reflection
it is a completely selfish idea if you
don't afford your partner the same
flexibility and openness to live that
way right so it is selfish if you say
I'm gonna go achieve this I want to go
build this life and by the way you've
got to come with me you've got to be if
I was saying this hypothetically to my
wife you've got to be on every flight I
take next year I I my work's really
important I'm saving the world I'm doing
a world tour you come with me if you
have that belief that is completely
selfish and ego based but if my belief
is yes this is my calling this is what
I'm meant to do on this planet and I'm
really moved by that but my wife's got
an amazing calling herself and I get so
much more attracted to her watching her
live her calling my wife becomes more
attractive to me amen the more she lives
her purpose not your wife I'm talking
about mine yeah yeah yeah yeah
like my wife doesn't become attractive
to me because she's helping me in my
purpose by just following and tagging
along do you know how she'll become even
more attractive if she opens that
restaurant yeah I know that would like
you know put it right up there but yeah
the idea that you know I and so I think
there is a selfishness right and I
wanted to caveat that
um so I'm not saying you need to be
perfectly happy I'm saying you need to
know
who you are yeah you need to know your
values currently and you need to know
your goals currently all those things
will change and evolve as you grow and
evolve but if you've done the practice
of understanding that at this point
you're going to be better at
communicating articulating and evolving
and sharing it again when it changes
what if I'm really hurt I was cheated on
I was in a seven year relationship and
thinking about one of my friends I was
in a seven year relationship I was
cheated on now I'm insecure I you know
I've low self-esteem is it relationship
time no not at all not one bit because
that's the point that we're talking
about where you skip step one you've
skipped Dharma and you've leaned into
Karma because you don't want to sort
Dharma Dharma is making sense of who you
are and who you want to be and and what
your role in this world is and I feel
that when you walk into a relationship
with that insecurity it now ruins
potentially the safest secure person
that you could have been with
and so I'm going I was just going to say
you know this is this is
who am I to judge I had all of my own BS
to deal with and overcome and understand
about myself
um much of which I've talked about many
times before but if I if I was to take a
cross-section of the people in my life
that are struggling relationships almost
every single one of them has skipped the
first stage which has the hard stage you
know the thing about that first stage is
a lot of people just don't feel like
they have the time yes especially we're
all getting a little bit older you know
things have changed in society which
means people are getting in less
relationships and they're getting in
them later in life so some people feel
that they have a clock
and that means that when they think look
Jay I'm
X years old today and you're telling me
to do this Dharma and this Arthur I need
to get to Karma I need to find this guy
and what we don't realize is that the
work that you skip in step one and two
you're gonna have to do with another
person yeah and that work doing it with
them is going to slow the quality of
that relationship down potentially ruin
a great thing and push someone away amen
and and actually make a mess of the
situation and so it's kind of like a
game where it's like you could have the
cheat code that skips you to 10 but the
skills of levels one to nine help you
win at ten yeah but if you skip the game
because you had the cheat code or you
tried to rush it or you got a pirated
version or whatever it is you now can't
win at level number 10 and I think we
don't realize that what the Game of Life
does is it pushes you back to learn the
lessons you haven't learned yet so you
get into a relationship out of
insecurity that person breaks up with
you you're back to being insecure again
then you get into another relationship
to solve your insecurity that person
breaks up with you and then you get
insecure again you're constantly pushed
into saying deal with this insecurity
alone
fix it figure it out learn about it get
curious about it and by the way when you
do that next time you walk into a
relationship a you'll know
or have more chance of knowing whether
that person's going to be right or wrong
but if it's right you're going to be
able to make it work and you're not
going to push away something that's
powerful and to summarize these steps so
Dharma is um as written here in the book
purpose clarifies your values and
priorities
um to yourself and your partner that's
really working on yourself step two
Arthur is working towards stability in
terms of your finances health
self-development and personal growth and
once you're there you're ready for some
comma which is pleasure and connection
um which is basically relationships with
others it's so interesting one of the
questions I did want to ask you today
before we um before you even got here
was exactly this I actually had a
conversation an hour before you arrived
with a friend of mine who is
um in her mid-30s and is really
struggling with relationships and um I
was having a conversation with her about
it
and it's all the things we just talked
about which is like she feels like she's
running out of time yeah she feels like
there's the world has changed and it's
now all digital and like she's not
meeting enough people she thinks maybe
if I go get my hair done and this done
and I get that done or if I get a
membership to Soho house maybe then I'll
[__] meet a guy
and like what you must encounter these
people in your DMs over and over again
that are saying that I'm nearly 40 years
old I'm single
it's not working for me what's your
advice to those people well I think the
first thing I'd say is it is hard it is
a really tough time to
be single right now compared to what it
was like a few years ago like it is much
harder with the landscape and how it's
changed like 25 50 years ago you'd meet
someone who lived in a one to five mile
radius from your home you wouldn't even
be thinking about having a long distance
relationship in the same way whereas
today you're meeting anyone and everyone
all across the world you have an app
that connects you to anyone in that
location an area wherever you just got
off a plane so there is complexity
there's more choice now there's the
Paradox of choice of well there's plenty
of fish in the sea and if this doesn't
work out there's so many more people and
other people that are thinking about you
and you're worried about that so it is
much harder and so I don't want to get
away from that like I don't want to
negate the fact that dating today and
finding love is hard it's why I wrote
the book uh I think that
what I'm encouraging for people to
understand
is that
a having all those insecurities around
relationships doesn't put you in the
best decision-making profile to make the
right decision so all of that stress and
all of that insecurity and all of that
anxiety is more likely to push you into
a relationship that is unhealthy and
toxic than it is to help you move in the
right direction
so first of all I just want you to
accept that making a decision from your
current mindset is not going to help you
make a good one it's just not going to
work you're more likely to settle for
someone you're more likely to give in
for something less than you deserve
because right now you're just happy with
anything you're just happy with someone
who texts you back and that's not the
relationship you want to be in so
first I would accept that this mindset
is not going to help you the mindset
that is going to help you is okay let if
I figure out
three simple things just what I like and
what I don't like about myself and in
life not about a person I'm not asking
to even think about a person what do I
like and not like as me
what are my values personally right now
like what's valuable to me not about
this person what's valuable to me and
what are my goals
if you figure out those three things
you're more likely to meet people how if
you know what you like and dislike
you're gonna spend time in places that
you like and dislike where you're more
likely to meet people that have similar
likes and dislikes or that at least you
can connect with second if you know your
values you're more likely to know who to
ask for an introduction to someone
because you know who knows who you know
that that friend of yours is more likely
to know someone who has a similar value
because they're of that value
and then goals make it easier to figure
out whether it's going to go somewhere
so you actually speed up and simplify a
really tough selection process because
our whole society has set us up to say
right list of what you want in a person
write a list of what you want in
yourself like just write a list of like
who are you what my values and what are
my goals and you figured that out
it becomes so much more easier to weed
it out and so I would encourage you to
say this isn't uh you don't have to
become a monk for three years you don't
have to go and like live in a
Mountaintop you don't have to go on a
yoga retreat like I'm not telling you to
do this for like decades you could do
this in three months if you wanted to
like this isn't like a decade-long
process there's something really
interesting here about like delaying
gratification just generally I was
actually reading yesterday
um about the people that delay
gratification in their lives and those
that don't and why from a physiological
standpoint some people don't delay
gratification I was reading about the
marshmallow test yeah yeah which I'm
sure you've heard about
um and some of the factors that are at
play there is when people are stressed
you know um in the case of a marshmallow
it creates a dopamine hit which is a
feel-good you know chemical for the
reward center in your brain so one can
understand why you would reach for the
marshmallow if you were feeling stressed
and you needed that dopamine hair one of
them is also self-esteem yeah which is
if your self-esteem is low
and you're looking for the same kind of
dopamine hit you get from having a
[__] bad one-night stand with the
wrong person it's much harder to delay
your gratification and make good
long-term decisions in line with your
values if your self-esteem is low so all
of these things point to this like
fundamental which I think people Miss in
our society because we live in a society
where
I'd rather have it now I'd rather go to
a surgeon and get it fixed I'd rather
you know do it on Photoshop than
actually do the work it's like doing the
work a you don't see but who the [__]
wants to do the work totally is like
doing that the foundational stuff is the
answer to all of the stuff you see on
the outside like and and you know what
you're saying with that example is that
you also
you also attract what you use to impress
so if you use
something specific to impress someone
that's the quality and vibration of
energy you're attracting so if I use
money money like I did yeah to attract
someone which works perfectly well
you're attracting someone who values
that about you yes if you use your only
your physical appearance obviously we're
all attracted to each other and that's
fine like but if you only use your
physical appearance and you believe
that's your only asset and you're
playing the game of just showing off
that guess what you're gonna try that's
a really important question because that
solves something for one of the people
I'm thinking about in my head this
person she's obviously she's a friend
but somebody that I know and um
she's using her outstanding Beauty to
attract people yeah and it's failed to
over and over again because she's
attracting the wrong type of person with
the wrong type of values in her own
words and in my to bring this back to
myself there was this phase between 18
and 23 I'm gonna say where all I used to
attract girls was bottles of Dom
Perignon in a club I would buy five
bottles of Dom Perignon at night you
know bring the sparklers and it was like
a mousetrap yeah but I was I was
attracting the wrong type of values yeah
because I was the wrong type of values
correct and you and you don't think that
and and the worst part about that for
your friend is that it's not just an
issue that the guy she attracts value
only that about her the biggest issue is
she's setting herself to only value that
about her amen which means when someone
leaves her for that reason
it just plays into the belief of I'm not
good enough there's this beautiful uh
Fable story that I love to share and
it's about
a kid who finds like a gem in his house
like a stone and he goes up to his dad
and he says how much is this Stone worth
Dad what's the value of this Stone
and the dad says I want you to go out to
the baker
and when you go out to the baker say
that you're selling the stone and when
they ask you how much it is hold up two
fingers
and so the kid said okay I'll do that
the kid ran out went to the baker the
baker said oh that looks nice how much
are you selling it for kid held up two
fingers the baker said oh two dollars
I'll take it so the kid ran back
and the kids said Dad their Baker off
for two dollars
the dad said okay now I want you to go
to an antique shop and I want you to
show them the jewel
uh the the stone and when you show them
the stone I want you to hold up two
fingers again
so the boy runs off and the antique
person says oh that's a nice Stone how
much is it
and the boy holds up two fingers and he
says oh 200 200 okay yeah I'll take it
and the boy runs back
and then and then Dad says okay now I
want you to go to this jeweler in this
rare store of gems and stones and jewels
and go up and do the same thing the boy
runs back goes to this shows the stone
holds up two fingers and the Jeweler
says oh two thousand dollars I'll take
it
and you know that story to me is really
the story that we're all going through
where we're letting someone else Define
our worth by what we showed them and how
all those people are going to rate you
based on their own knowledge and their
own experience so if you're a person of
low vibration and insecurity and anxiety
and you're letting someone Define you at
two dollars worth that's what you're
getting whereas if you've already priced
yourself and this is my worth this is
who I am this is my value you'll never
let someone undervalue you and that's
the challenge today is that because we
don't value ourselves and we're letting
someone else value us we are being
undervalued by every person we date and
meet and that's how everyone feels
everyone feels like that stone
that is undervalued because you're not
being perceived by the right people for
the right things it's so true and um it
you know I wasn't going to ask this
question but it tees up because I always
think about you know Sophia who's
listening to this and it's just heard
you say that and she's going I
completely agree Jay the next question
is how do I genuinely not [__] how
do I genuinely value myself more I'm not
just saying it in the mirror and writing
it down how do I genuinely value myself
more so that I can get better from the
world so so this is and I love what you
just said I don't believe that value
comes
from a journal or a conversation with
yourself in a mirror please buy the
diary
and I love Journal
journalists
what's really interesting
is self value
real self-worth
comes from doing hard things
we keep talking about self-love we keep
talking about loving yourself believing
in yourself
that happens naturally when you go
through something difficult everyone
who's listening right now I guarantee
you has been through something difficult
maybe they lost a friend maybe they've
been through cancer maybe they lost
their job and had to rebuild maybe they
completely got destroyed during the
pandemic and had to figure everything
out with their health
the point is we've all done hard things
and self-worth and self-value comes from
recognizing the hardship you've been
through and the growth that you made
during that time now if you're someone
who's listening and saying Jay well I'm
not sure I've been through anything that
challenging well that's your challenge
go and figure out what it is that you
want to do that's hard is it developing
a new skill is it getting a
qualification is it starting that
business or dream that you've always
wanted to do what's that difficult thing
you're gonna do on your own with your
friends with the support of whoever's
around you but not with the crutch or
the handicap of a partner what are you
gonna build as a skill as a tool as a
value yourself that's going to make you
say I've done something
and that's the beginning of it the
beginning is I've done something and I
did that and I can do that and when you
do that yes there's going to be you're
going to validate the wrong things
you're gonna you're gonna you're gonna
give yourself praise for the wrong
things you're gonna go through ego
you're going to do all of that but
there's still a belief if I can do hard
things I can do hard things by myself
and I know what value I bring to a
relationship
you were just talking about doing hard
things
so let's talk about sex sex is a huge
part of relationships yeah and one of
the one of the really interesting things
I want to talk to you about is if again
if I look at my friendship group
my small friendship group of maybe six
guys right my best friends I'd say three
of them are currently having
a really really hard time as it relates
to sex with their partner um for a
variety of reasons
reason number one that I've heard my
partner doesn't like having sex we have
sex once every three months
reason number two I've heard my partner
doesn't like the way that I have sex
on those first two points I'm horrified
surprised that so many people I speak to
are struggling in that department yeah
with sex and there's not the
conversation around sex is either
non-existent or porn influenced yeah
what's your take on sex and what's going
on I'm so glad you brought it up because
I I think that because of social media
there's this image that everyone else is
having sex and I'm not like I feel like
that's like a very big feeling that a
lot of people have and all the stats
show the people having less and less sex
there are more and more sexless
relationships and marriages every single
year and it's so much more common yet in
our groups and online everyone feels
like oh they're getting some and they're
getting some and they're getting some
but I'm not and the truth is most people
are not getting any and and that's just
I don't have the stats offhand right now
but whenever I've looked at the trends
that's what the trends show
to me it comes back down to everything
we've just been talking about
sexual chemistry and attraction and
connection is all based on a how someone
feels about themself if someone
themselves is not feeling taken care of
by themselves attractive
investing in themselves growing feeling
like they're becoming more and better
it's very unlikely that they're going to
want to share their body mind emotions
and heart with anyone else in the most
physically intimate way which is sex
it's just unlikely and chances are if
you don't think you're having those
conversations you want to have with your
partner where you are being open where
they are working on their values where
we do see each other striving chances
are that you're not going to want to
have sex with them either and so what
we're seeing is that the challenge we're
having in sex is actually coming from
everything else that's going on that
there isn't a sense of growth Joy
purpose like great sex is a byproduct of
great connection and intimacy it's not a
replacement for or a source of if I
asked everyone who's listening right now
put your hand up if you've had amazing
sex but no connection in a relationship
right like that's that's been real we've
all used sex as a crutch we've had
relationships where every time we argued
we had sex it solved the problem every
time something was going wrong we had
sex it was figured out somehow and the
study showed that the chemicals released
during sex make you feel like you're
getting closer even though you're not
actually emotionally closer
so when you look at all of the stats
when you look at all the research when
you look at everything we've just
described sex is a byproduct of a
healthy individual and a healthy
individual and a growing individual and
a growing individual coming together
sorting out their differences having the
fights they need to have having the
conversations they do that naturally
creates vulnerability which leads to
being able to expose ourselves at the
deepest most
um physical way that we possibly can how
can you expose yourself that vulnerably
if if you can't even have a vulnerable
conversation with your partner because
you just switch on the TV every night
and avoid that difficult conversation
becomes like a transaction it becomes a
transaction and then sex becomes in the
best case a crutch and uh and a hopeful
aspiration on a special night or
whatever it may be or something we wait
for and plan for and it never works out
as opposed in the worst case it just
becomes something we're both not
talking about comfortable about or even
doing and so for an obligation exactly
yes yes yeah like an obligation
someone's just sitting there like you
know come on three minutes literally
yeah all right let's get it over and
done with like that mindset and I'm like
well like there isn't because we've lost
Intimacy in relationships there is no
intimacy and so you can't force it
physically there's no Intimacy in porn
there's no Intimacy in porn for sure I
don't like do the small talk I don't no
pay for that exactly there's no Intimacy
in porn there's no in and the problem is
and this is you know the book starts
with this quote but it solves this
problem very very neatly and carefully
and it's this idea that
the Buddha was once approached
and asked what's the difference between
I like you and I love you
which is a brilliant question and the
Buddha replied when you like a flower
you simply pluck it
but when you love a flower you water it
every day
and to me the one night stand the porn
the dopamine hit the release of chemical
is the plucking right that's what we're
all plucking all day long because that's
all we can do
but the watering the intimacy developing
intimacy growing from entertainment to
experiments to experiences to education
to engaging in service together all of
this creates so much intimacy that
physical intimacy is a natural byproduct
it's not something you have to
manage or engineer or manufacture like
it's not this separate thing it's it's
based on how close I feel to you and the
point is when don't feel close to our
partners because we don't do anything
that makes us closer every day sleeping
in the same bed as someone does not make
you close to someone living in the same
house as someone does not make you close
to someone the only thing that makes you
feel close to someone is when you feel
you can be open and when you feel seen
heard and understood in your most
vulnerable darkest and open times if you
can do that everything else is going to
work but if you can't do that you can't
just make it happen in a moment because
you're meant to be together you're meant
to be in love what about masturbation
do you think it do you think
masturbation to porn helps or hurts
relationships
I think in the long term it hurts
I think it's unhealthy because it's an
avoidance and an Escape right that's the
point it's like what is it being used as
it's not being used as self-connection
or self-understanding it's been used as
escape and avoidance of the actual topic
and all that's doing is rewiring your
brain for false expectations diminishing
returns as well all the studies that I
did look at showed that porn is making
you work harder you're gonna have to
find something more extreme all the
stats that I saw showed that you had to
watch more extreme porn to get the same
feeling so the most searched porn and
the most watched porn was abusive uh
sometimes violent sometimes rough
hardcore all the Search terms were more
extreme to get the same feeling because
of the diminishing returns of the
chemicals that are being released and so
now you're rewiring your brain to not
feel as much pleasure from normal sex
or more traditional conventional sex
you're now saying that I'm only going to
feel pleasure from sex when it's
potentially abusive violent somewhat
rough hardcore whatever else it may be
so I think that's massively unhealthy
there's something it does to
expectations as well and expectations of
the key of that's what we're saying yeah
your expectations of sex become
completely unrealistic
your expectations of intimacy are just
thrown out the window there must be so
many people listening to this both men
and women because both sexes do watch
porn it's quite naive everyone to assume
it's just men that are jacking off in
there of course in their bedrooms
whatever but um I bet there's people
listening to this who have a partner
that's constantly watching it and they
know they watch it potentially maybe
they've caught them a few times and they
really want them to stop they think it's
maybe killing the desire in a
relationship it's a difficult
conversation too oh good you know yeah
it's really tough and like I said when I
was
you know I I think it'd be interesting
to look at this and I would be
fascinated to see
whether the people that are watching
porn and and I need to talk to more
people than I have about it the people
that I know that watch porn and that's
why I'm only speaking from my experience
don't feel good about it they they
internally deeply at the root when we're
in a coaching session we get to the core
of it they feel guilty they feel
shameful they feel embarrassed about it
it doesn't make them feel good and they
wouldn't openly admit it in a community
of people now I'm speaking about a very
specific group of people that I've that
have come to me for help or support in
their relationships
they don't feel good about it that
doesn't mean they don't feel good when
they're watching it I'm saying they
don't feel good afterwards when they
think about it when they reflect on it
they're like that's not what I imagined
would be my sex life that's not where I
thought I'd turn to for for satisfaction
and enjoyment so
to me that's again comes back to down
the same approach and that's why the
approach is always the same we're always
approaching the problem from or The
Challenge from empathy and compassion
we're not approaching it from judgment
and accusation of like oh you're such a
waste you're such a late you know like
that mindset doesn't ever make someone
want to open up like if you run up to
your partner and said God you just watch
porn all the time that you you know
you're one of the worst guys like
haven't seen all my mates they're doing
this and they get this from their
partners and what are you doing that
person's never gonna tell you
when they watch porn or what they're
challenged with it is or how embarrassed
they feel or whatever it may be was if
you went up to them and said hey you
know I know I know that you watch porn
and I wanted to know when it started
like when did you get into it like what
like allow yourself to be an interviewer
about it not an interrogator and I feel
like one of the biggest mistakes we make
in our relationships is we interrogate
our partners not interview them let's be
curious let's let's actually try and
understand it let's look at it because
it's human it's natural like like we
said like 99 of people are doing it
anyway so why are we pretending like
it's only in our relationship why are we
pretending that oh no one else does this
but only my partner does this that's not
true so if it's that widespread and it's
that common and there's this huge
industry that's been built off of it why
are we judging our partner and why are
we making them feel less than do you
watch porn I don't I I've I mean when
you
you know I mean three years of being a
celibate monk with no access to the
internet or phone gives you some good
training uh I yeah I feel like so I grew
up and I'll explain why too I feel like
I started having sex early
and so early in the sense for me for me
so I felt that when were the years where
most of my friends were watching porn I
was having sex and so I didn't get into
it as a habit early on in life which is
where I found it Formed for most of my
friends
and then by the time
they would get having real sex I became
a monk and so it was it was a really
weird order of stuff
does that make sense yes for me it was
that idea of like
yeah it was just
I think I had I had the real thing when
my friends were watching porn and then
by the time they were having the real
thing I was on such a different path
three years of celibacy three years of
celibacy would do it to you it was one
of the hardest no thanks
it was one of the hardest and best
things though because
one of the things we don't realize and I
want to address this and celibacy is
really interesting thing to address
I would love to see more people and this
may be
not a popular concept and I'm good with
that I would love to see more people
date people
without having sex for a committed
number of months
so committing with the new person that
you're dating to not make sex a
connection point so one of my good
friends did this recently as well
and he found that it gave him the
ability to make better decisions as to
whether there was real intimacy whether
there was real connection and whether
there was something real here
that could be built upon with sex as
opposed to God I'm just so attracted to
her and she's so attracted to me and we
just have the best sex ever or we don't
and then that's what it's all hanging on
and so I actually would go down that
route and say that celibacy doesn't have
to be practiced how I practice there's
three years as a monk celibacy can be
practiced in small doses not because
you're trying to be celibate and you're
trying to repress yourself that's that's
not what I'm encouraging what I'm
encouraging is why not use it as a way
of making healthier decisions because
studies show we make don't make good
decisions after we have sex and studies
show that we don't make good decisions
when we've had sex with someone for a
long time because that's completely
rewiring how we feel about them so
that's one way of looking at it and the
other way I'd say even going even more
extreme
is being celibate as a monk allowed me
to redirect all that energy and the word
for monk in the tradition I stayed in is
brahmacharya or brahmacari and what that
means technically is proper use of that
energy
so celibacy is not a repression or a
suppression or a closing off it's
re-utilizing that vital energy in a
different direction if you think about
how much money time and energy you've
spent chasing someone that you liked the
amount of time in your head the amount
of time on your phone text messages uh
dating apps the amount of money you
spent I I would have been so rich if I
never took anyone out on a date before
21 like think about all the money I
wasted on showing off to women before I
was 21. yeah exactly take all of that
energy think about what you could
achieve creatively if you used all that
energy used to pursue another person if
you use that energy to create because
it's Creative Energy
so to me celibacy was far more about I
got to use three years of Creative
Energy in doing a lot of self work
that I otherwise could have taken years
to do because of so many distractions
and Pursuits that
kind of
spread that energy across
we have a closing tradition on this
podcast I know I like it I like it it's
interesting I've never done this before
I don't usually tell people who the
person's been left the question's been
left by
but I know you're a Manchester United
fan huge that's all I'm gonna say huge
get a question left for you yeah is is
there a time in your childhood
when you could look back and think
this is the reason why I'm sitting here
today
plus why
it's beautiful
I'd have to say it's um
I'd have to say it's getting to me
the monks because when I was 18 when I
first met a monk which I talk about in
things like a month
and um
I just don't think I've ever
visibly experienced
or emotionally experienced
humility
and compassion like I say these words
and we use them as a society
but I think there's very few people in
the world that you could actually say
display
boundless compassion
and
extreme humility
sincere empathy
and I'm really lucky because I saw that
all in real life like I've seen it why
does that make you emotional I can see
it in your face
because it's I I feel
I feel that that's the biggest lack in
the world today that
the reason why we struggle with living
these ideas
is because we don't have
enough role models that live these
we don't have people that we could point
to in our immediate
accessible life that we would say are
boundlessly compassionate or that we as
we would say are extremely empathetic or
that we would say are genuinely humble
to the core like that's so rare
and I think if I hadn't experienced it I
wouldn't believe it was possible to
achieve it and to access it
and for us to see the benefits of it
but because I got to do that at 18 and
and continue to do so now when I spend
time with those individuals
I really believe in the greatness and
the genuineness of humanity like I
believe it's there like I believe that
that spark exists within each and every
single person who's listening and I
believe that it fully is who we truly
are deepest in our spirit that's who we
are and
I just want to be able to
help people uncover that part of
themselves and
I'm here because I've seen it and I'm
here because I've experienced it I'm
here because I've lived with it
and so even if I don't have it
to that capacity I know it exists
and I would like other people to have
access to it and so that's why I'm here
today
that's a brilliant question
well done Ria
or whoever it is
all Cristiano Ronaldo if you did that
one that I would I would flip out
former Manchester United yeah yeah
Christian was dead to me yeah
Jay thank you thank you once again every
time we spend time together it's such an
honor and a privilege um this time it's
funny because I never think we can it's
always there's always a risk that we
might not be able to top it per se do
you want to have that but it's not
really about that is it it's about like
it's exactly what this is which is the
variety it's the depth it's the honesty
it's the openness which I feel like I
can only do with someone like you who is
willing to reciprocate but also has done
a lot of work to kind of find those
answers so yeah thank you for always for
doing this thank you for breaking your
your little month-long um sort of time
out your holiday to come and do this as
well means a lot to me
um thank you for writing a great Book on
a topic your book is so good that I've
decided not to write one on this topic I
think we talked about this in La when we
went for lunch like it's such a great
book and it's so hard to write
interesting unique things on a topic
like love which has been written a lot
about
um but you've managed to do that with
this book I read things in this book
that I've never heard before that
allowed me to understand something that
I'm that I'd been struggling with or
struggled to articulate from a Brand New
Perspective and also I have to say
I'm exceptionally excited to come and
see your world tour which is on sale now
I'm gonna come me and my partner are
going to come and watch it in London
yeah
um extremely excited I I'm just
generally more more excited to see what
you do live
um because I think there's huge huge
potential in your message delivered in
that Medium on stage I know you've done
lots of live things before but I'm
particularly excited by this and I
implore everybody to come and join me on
the tour because it's um I know if you
do it then it's going to be it's going
to be significant important and valuable
so I'm super excited to come watch you
on the tour um everyone can go buy
tickets now and the book is
necessary so if anyone's looking if
anyone's had any struggles with some of
the topics you've discussed today all of
them are explained in more detail in
this wonderful book which really is
another pioneering book of our time and
say that on the back of it I'm actually
so happy I'm on the back of it that's
amazing
um so everybody go check out the book
Jay thank you Stephen thank you so much
man and I do want to say this and I do
mean it and I message you I can't
remember maybe it was a week ago or
whatever and I said to you like
look we let's just have the conversation
that we can have like I don't need you
to you know I don't want to have a
conversation that ever with you or with
anyone but especially with someone that
I know and I feel comfortable with and I
had no idea where today was going to go
and I honestly like these are probably
things we would have talked about if
there weren't microphones and so I think
that and and I do feel I definitely feel
like
I was because of our relationship and as
and as our relation is weird too but you
know in the sense of how open I do feel
with you sometimes but I would say that
in my eyes
I feel
we did something different to last time
in an evolved version where there was
even more vulnerability from me because
of our relationship yeah and and I think
that that's
you know I hope I hope everyone who's
listening like receives that in that I I
was that open because I was with you and
that was someone that I feel trusted by
it's also for someone that I feel
uh understands me even though we haven't
spent the time together understands me
in a different way and sees me and hears
me differently and so I can allow myself
to be that vulnerable huge compliment
thank you thank you appreciate you bro
thank you so much see you again soon
absolutely man
[Music]
thank you